Siamese Neural Network (SNN) is an architecture based on CNN and designed to recognize images. How?
The model is actually built from 2 identical CNN networks, each of which receives an image. After processing the image in each network, the networks are connected and merged into a network that measures the 'distances' between the two images, that is, how much the images are the same/different. There is a special loss function for SNN -
and it is actually the one that measures the distances.
For example, if we enter two images of a dog - we expect to see a small distance. If we enter one image of a dog and one of a cat - we expect to see a larger distance.
In addition, already during training we expect to see the learning process of the network expressed in the fact that the distances between identical images are small (= called: positive distance) and the distances between different images increase (= called: negative distance). For the purpose of training, we prepared the data in the following way: We built pairs from the training and test data. We gave each pair a label - if it is a pair of identical images - it is called a positive pair, 0, and if it is a pair of different images - it is called a negative pair, 1.
During training, the pairs are inserted each time and the model learns the distances. Then, pairs from the test are run on it and the prediction it gives is seen - whether it marked a pair of different images as far enough apart, and a pair of identical images as close enough.
The uniqueness of the Siamese network is that it does not test a single image. It is always compared to something else. On the other hand, since it is two CNNs running in parallel, it is a very powerful tool that gives reliable and efficient results.
The model already exists in the keras language and all we have to do is adapt it to us - change hyperparameters, build the pairs correctly, build the layers after the union and choose a loss function.
